Explanation of Scripture read by Orthodox Christians on the 10th Sunday after Pentecost Matthew 17:14-23

QUESTION 1

"And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a certain man, kneeling down to him, and saying, {15} Lord, have mercy on my son: for he is a lunatic, and sore vexed: for ofttimes he falleth into the fire, and oft into the water." (Matthew 17:14)


What was the belief at the time about lunatics? What was the real cause of their affliction? 

QUESTION 2

"And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a certain man, kneeling down to him, and saying, {15} Lord, have mercy on my son: for he is a lunatic, and sore vexed: for ofttimes he falleth into the fire, and oft into the water." (Matthew 17:14)


What is the spiritual meaning of the fire? 

QUESTION 3

"And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a certain man, kneeling down to him, and saying, {15} Lord, have mercy on my son: for he is a lunatic, and sore vexed: for ofttimes he falleth into the fire, and oft into the water." (Matthew 17:14)


What is the spiritual meaning of the water? 


QUESTION 4

"And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him."


Which disciples did he bring his boy to for a cure? Some were missing. Which. Where were they? 

QUESTION 5

"Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you?" (Matthew 17:17)


Who is Jesus calling "faithless and perverse", and why? 


QUESTION 6

"Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you?" (Matthew 17:17)


Jesus is making a prophesy here. Which? 

QUESTION 7

"Then came the disciples to Jesus apart, and said, Why could not we cast him out? " (Matthew 17:19)


Why were the disciples unable to cast out the demon? 

QUESTION 8

"And Jesus said unto them, Because of your unbelief: for verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, aye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you. "</SQ (Matthew 17:21)


What does the "mountain" signify spiritually? 

QUESTION 9

"... Verily I say unto you, If aye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, aye shall say unto this mountain, Remove hence to yonder place; and it shall remove; and nothing shall be impossible unto you." (Matthew 17:20)


Describe how faith should be as a mustard see. This has to do with the properties of the mustard see, and the size of the tree it becomes. 


QUESTION 10

"Howbeit this kind goeth not out but by prayer and fasting." (Matthew 17:21)


What is "this kind"? Jesus is referring to more than just the demon in the boy, is presenting us with a method which the church has always understood, and valued. Explain. 


