Explanation of Scripture read by Orthodox Christians on the 10th Thursday after Pentecost 2 Corinthians 1:1-7 Matthew 21:43-46
Answers

ANSWER 1

"The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner. {23} This is the LORD'S doing; it is marvellous in our eyes." (Psalms 117:22-23) 


ANSWER 2

Matins, at "God is the Lord".


ANSWER 3

Jesus is the stone. 


"Christ is called A Stone, not only because of His strength, but because He mightily crushes His enemies; whence it follows, And whoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken, and on whomever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder" (St John Chrysostom)


ANSWER 4

"Christ is the stone, the builders are the Jewish teachers who rejected Christ, saying, This man is not of God." (St John Chrysostom)


ANSWER 5

"He is become the head of the corner, because He is the union of both sides between the Law and the Gentiles." (St Hilary of Potiers)
 

ANSWER 6

Jealousy and pride and a desire to keep  the status quo.


ANSWER 7

The majority of the Jews would reject the Messiah and the church would be populated majorly by the Gentiles.


ANSWER 8

"Whoever sins, yet believes in Him, falls indeed upon a stone and is broken, yet is not altogether crushed, but is preserved to salvation through endurance." (St Jerome)


ANSWER 9

"But on whomsoever it shall fall, that is, whomsoever this stone shall itself assault, and whosoever shall utterly deny Christ, it shall so crush him, that not a bone of him shall be left in which a drop of water could be taken up." (St Jerome)


ANSWER 10

"Here is the difference between good and bad men. The good man when taken in a sin has sorrow because he has sinned, the bad man is grieved not because he has sinned, but because he is found out in his sin; and he not only does not repent, but is indignant with him that reproved him. Thus they being taken in their sins were stirred up to still greater wickedness; And they sought to lay hands on him, but feared the multitude because they took him for a Prophet." (St John Chrysostom)


