Questions template 
Answers

ANSWER 1

"Who were the Herodians?  They were either soldiers of Hereod, or adherents to a newly appeared heresy which taught that Herod himself was the messiah, because with him the succession of Judiac kings had come to an end. For the prophecy of Jacob clearly stated that when the line of princes from Judah  would fail, then the Christ would come.  Therefore since there was no Judaic prince during Herod's years, and Herod, a native of Idumea, ruled as a foreigner, there were those who thought that he was the messiah.  They formed a heretical faction, and it was they who were attempting to kill the Lord." (Blessed Theophylact, Commentary on Mark)


ANSWER 2

"But the Lord withdrew, for it was not yet time for the Passion.  But He also  withdrew from those ungrateful ones so that He might do good to others as  well." (Blessed Theophylact, Commentary on Mark)


ANSWER 3

"For many followed Him and He healed them, and even those of Tyre and  Sidon, who were foreigners, received His help.  Gut those of His own kin  drove Him away, showing that kinship of blood is of no benefit without  kinship of heart.  So the foreigners came to Jesus from afar, but the Jews, to whom Jesus came, drove Him away. " (Blessed Theophylact, Commentary on Mark)


ANSWER 4

"Take heed how Jesus gives orders to His disciples  that a boat should be made ready for Him so that the multitude would not  throng Him.  For Jesus is the Word within you, Which commands that your
boat,  signifying your body, should wait on Him and not set forth into the tempest  of life's affairs, lest the crowds, signifying the turmoil of life's affairs,  throng Christ within you." (Blessed Theophylact, Commentary on Mark)


ANSWER 5

But those who follow Him  are those who depart from their own homes and cities, that is, who
leave  behind all relations according to the flesh.  Whereupon their scourges are  healed, I mean, their sins which scourge the conscience, and the unclean  spirits are driven out.  


ANSWER 6



ANSWER 7

"Jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea; He fled from their treachery, because the hour of His passion had not yet come, and no place away from Jerusalem was proper for His Passion." (Venerabel Bede)


ANSWER 8



ANSWER 9



ANSWER 10



