Questions about the Genealogy of Christ (Mat 1:1-17)

QUESTION 1

Why is the genealogy in the first chapter of Matthew of Joseph, since he was only the foster father of Christ? Or, as St John Chrysostom puts it:  


"But whence is it manifest that He is of David?" one may say.  For if He was not sprung of a man, but from a woman only, and the Virgin hath not her genealogy traced, how shall we know that He was of David's race?  Thus, there are two things inquired; both why His mother's genealogy is not recited, and wherefore it can be that Joseph is mentioned by them, who hath no part in the birth: since the latter seems to be superfluous, and the former a defect."  (Chrysostom - Homilies on Matthew, Homily 2.  Section 7)


QUESTION 2

"Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren" (Matthew 1:2)

Who was the mother of Isaac? 
Why was Isaac so named? 


QUESTION 3

What is Isaac a "type" of? 


QUESTION 4

"Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren" (Matthew 1:2)

Who is the mother of Jacob?
Who were Jacob's wives?  How did he obtain them? 


The Great canon of St Andrew of Crete attaches an important symbolic meaning to Jacobs's two wives.  What do they represent? 


QUESTION 5

"Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat Judas and his brethren" (Matthew 1:2)


Who was the mother of Judas (or Judah)(who is on the line of Christ?)


Who was the second to the youngest of Judah's brethren?  He is also an important "type". 


QUESTION 6

"And Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar;" (Matthew 1:3)


What was Judas and Thamar's relationship?  Tell the circumstances of the conception.  The even more important and marvelous circumstances of the birth of Phares and Zara are discussed in the next question. 


QUESTION 7

"And Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar;" (Matt 1:3)

Tell the story of Phares and Zara.  How were they conceived?  What is the theological significance of the way they were born? 


QUESTION 8

"And Salmon begat Boaz of Rachab; and Boaz begat Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse;"  (Matthew 1:5)

What sort of woman was Rachab? 
Tell the important story associated with her. 


QUESTION 9

"And Salmon begat Boaz of Rachab; and Boaz begat Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse;"  (Matthew 1:5)

Who was Ruth? Tell of her life previous to meeting Boaz.
What might we glean from her marriage to Boaz? 


QUESTION 10

"And Jesse begat David the king; and David the king begat Solomon of her that had been the wife of Urias;" (Matthew 1:6)

Who was the former wife of Urias? 
Why did she conceive a son by David? 


