Questions on Genesis 1

QUESTION 1

Who wrote Genesis? How do we know this?


QUESTION 2

The word "Genesis" means what?


QUESTION 3

What was the first thing created?

QUESTION 4

How did God create the world?

QUESTION 5

What does ex nihilo mean?

QUESTION 6

[Gen 1:2]  And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.

Explain what the "Spirit of God" is.


QUESTION 7

What is very unique about God creating the light? Hint: it has to do with order.

QUESTION 8

[Gen 1:6-7]  And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters. {7} And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so.

What was the firmament?

QUESTION 9

[Gen 1:11]  And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.

What is the biological mechanism by which this is accomplished?

QUESTION 10

[Gen 1:16-18]  And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also. {17} And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth, {18} And to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that it was good.

What are the two lights?

QUESTION 11

Are human beings like the sun or the moon? Why

QUESTION 12

[Gen 1:26-27]  And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. {27} So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.


What is the "image of God"?

QUESTION 13

Do animals have a soul?

QUESTION 14

What did God intend for people to eat?

QUESTION 15

What did God intend for animals to eat?

QUESTION 16

Give verses in chapter one, which proves that the Trinity Father Son and Holy Spirit were all, involved in the creation.


