Orthodox Christian Questions about the Gospel of Matthew Chapter 2

QUESTION 1

Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem ... [Mat 2:1]

What does Bethlehem mean? Why is this name apropos?


QUESTION 2

Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem ... [Mat 2:1]

Why does Matthew mention Herod? Hint - this has to do with Herod's ethnic origins and a very important prophesy.


QUESTION 3

Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem ... [Mat 2:1]

Why did the Magi come? Why did they mention a star?


QUESTION 4

Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem ... [Mat 2:1]

What does the coming of the Magi forefigure? 


QUESTION 5

Saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the east, and are come to worship him. [Mat 2:2] 

There are many types of stars in the heavens. Our sun is a small star. Other stars are red giants, white dwarfs, etc. Discuss the nature of the star the Magi saw, and cite verses in Matthews gospel to support your opinion.


QUESTION 6

Saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the east, and are come to worship him. [Mat 2:2] 

Why did the Magi stop in their journey and inquire of Herod? Give two reasons.


QUESTION 7

When Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. [Mat 2:3]

Why was Herod troubled?


QUESTION 8
 
And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judaea: for thus it is written by the prophet, And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art not the least among the princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come a Governor, that shall a rule my people Israel. [Mat 2:5]

Which prophet? Is the quote they gave Herod absolutely accurate? Speculate why. 


QUESTION 9

And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art not the least among the princes of Juda: for out of thee shall come a Governor, that shall rule my people Israel. [Mat 2:6]

What does the prophet mean by "...out of thee shall come A Governor"?


QUESTION 10

And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and fell down, and worshipped him: and when they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts; gold, and frankincense, and myrrh. [Mat 2:11] 

What does this verse tell us about the day of the birth of the Lord Jesus?


QUESTION 11

And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and fell down, and worshipped him: and when they had opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts; gold, and frankincense, and myrrh. [Mat 2:11] 

What are the symbolic meanings of the gifts of the Magi?


QUESTION 12

[Mat 2:12]  And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to Herod, they departed into their own country another way.

There is almost always an outer and inner meanings to scripture, and this verse is not an exception. Elucidate both meanings. 


QUESTION 13

[Mat 2:13-15]  And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him. {14} When he arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt: {15} And was there until the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my son.

How did the flight into Egypt fulfill TWO prophesies?


QUESTION 14

Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time which he had diligently inquired of the wise men. [Mat 2:16]

Why did Herod pick this time period?


QUESTION 15

Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, {18} In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they are not. [Mat 2:17-18]

Rachel is both a metaphor, and a historical reference, and Ramah is a metaphor. Explain.


QUESTION 16

But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, {20} Saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the young child's life. {21} And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel. {22} But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judaea in the room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding, being warned of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee: {23} And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophets, He shall be called a Nazarene. [Mat 2:19-23] 

What is peculiar about this prophesy, and how we may infer that it is genuine? 



