Questions about Matt 14:22-34 9sunape (Walking on the Water)

QUESTION 1

"And when He had sent the multitudes away, He went up into the mountain apart to pray: and when the evening was come, He was there alone. But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves: for the wind was contrary."

 
Why did Jesus go up into the mountain to pray? 

QUESTION 2

"And when He had sent the multitudes away, He went up into the mountain apart to pray: and when the evening was come, He was there alone. But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves: for the wind was contrary."


There was another time when the Apostles were in a boat that was in a storm. 

Was this earlier than this event or later? 
Describe this other event.
 What can we glean from the order of the events? 

QUESTION 3

"And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went unto them, walking on the sea." (Matt 14:25)


What time is this?  Does the time teach us something important about the spiritual life?

QUESTION 4

Why did Jesus constrain his apostles to get in a ship? Hint: This followed which event?  How did the Jews view Jesus after this event? 


QUESTION 5

The boat the disciples were in is a wonderful image of what?  Explain.

QUESTION 6

Why did Peter get out of the boat and come to Jesus?  The reason is important, and has serious implications. 

QUESTION 7

What happened to Peter as he walked on the water towards Christ?  Why?  Answer with more depth than just recounting the event.  There is a deep meaning and lesson here. 

QUESTION 8

Coming back to the metaphor the boat represents, evaluate Peter's action in this light.  What made his action dangerous?  How do we "step out of the boat" in our life?


QUESTION 9

What is the spiritual meaning of the miracle?  Of course, this is an "open ended" question, and hard to answer.  So is the question of how we are to live our life, moment by moment.  Think a bit, and focus on one or more of these things: 



Jesus went up alone to a mountain to pray
The disciples were in a boat which was beset by terrible waves and winds.
Jesus came to the disciples in the fourth watch of the night.
Peter faltered after he left the ship.


QUESTION 10

Peter's experience walking on the water, feeling fear, and beginning to sink before being saved by Christ, foretold a future important experience. Which?

