Questions about scripture for the 9th Fri after Pentecost Mat 20:17-28

QUESTION 1

12 And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that sold doves,{13} And said unto them, It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves. 


How many times did Jesus do this (occurrences)? 
How were they spaced in time?
Describe other occurrences, and compare with this one. 


QUESTION 2

"It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer; but ye have made it a den of thieves. "


Where is this written?

QUESTION 3

Why did he call the money changers and sellers a "den of thieves"?

QUESTION 4

<QUOTE" {15} And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna to the son of David; they were sore displeased..."


Why were the chief priests and scribes displeased?

QUESTION 5

Why is Jesus called the "Son of David". What were the implications of this appellation to the Jewish people? What does "Hosanna" mean? 

QUESTION 6

"16 And said unto him, Hearest thou what these say? And Jesus saith unto them, Yea; have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise? "


Where is this written? 

QUESTION 7

"17 And he left them, and went out of the city into Bethany; and he lodged there." 


Where did Jesus most likely stay in Bethany? 

QUESTION 8

"18 Now in the morning as he returned into the city, he hungered.{19} And when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever. And presently the fig tree withered away." 


What does the fig tree represent? What is the teaching of the miracle? Recall a parable about the fig tree. 


QUESTION 9

Did the fig tree wither right then and there? Why or why not? 

QUESTION 10

When the disciples marvelled about the withered fig tree, Jesus seized the opportunity to teach them something important about faith. Explain.


