Explanation of Scripture read by Orthodox Christians on the 10th Monday after Pentecost 1 Corintians 15:12-19 Matthew 21:18-22

QUESTION 1

"12 Now if Christ be preached that he rose from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?"


Perhaps the Corinthians had picked up this false notion from judiazers among them. What Jewish sect did not believe in the resurrection from the dead?


QUESTION 2

"13 But if there be no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen: 14 And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain."


Why is our faith in vain if Christ is not risen? 

QUESTION 3

What are the 3 reasons mentioned as to why it is important that we believe in the Resurrection? 


QUESTION 4

Now in the morning as he returned into the city, he hungered. (Matt 21:18)


Jesus returned into what city? What had He done there the previous day? What period of time was this in His earthly ministry? 

QUESTION 5

"19 And when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found nothing thereon, but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever. And presently the fig tree withered away. " (Matthew 21:19)


Why did Jesus curse the fig tree? What does the fig tree represent? 

QUESTION 6

 A parable about a fig tree has the same basic meaning as Jesus withering the fig tree with a curse. 
 Describe and explain the parable. 


QUESTION 7

What must we do in prayer to be assured of receiving that which we ask for? 


QUESTION 8

"And when the disciples saw it, they marvelled, saying, How soon is the fig tree withered away! {21} Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, If ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to the fig tree, but also if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; it shall be done." (Matthew 21:20-21)


What does the mountain symbolize? 


QUESTION 9

Why did St. Paul write this passage? 


QUESTION 10

Why would our faith be in vain in Christ had not risen?


QUESTION 11

What are the 3 reasons mentioned as to why it is important that we believe in the Resurrection? 


QUESTION 12

If we have faith, what can we do?


QUESTION 13

What does the mountain symbolize?


QUESTION 14



QUESTION 15



QUESTION 16



QUESTION 17



QUESTION 18



