Explanation of Scripture read by Orthodox Christians on the 10th Tuesday after Pentecost Matthew 21:23-27, 1 Corinthians 15:29-38

QUESTION 1

"And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority?" Matt 21:23) 


What are "these things" which the question refers to? 
By what authority did Christ do the things he did? 


QUESTION 2

What was the intent of the question of the chief priests and elders? 

QUESTION 3

"And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this authority? {24} And Jesus answered and said unto them, I also will ask you one thing, which if ye tell me, I in like wise will tell you by what authority I do these things." Matt 21:23-24)


What does Jesus teach about answering insincere question related to the faith? 

QUESTION 4

According to Blessed Theophylact, Jesus teaches us another virtue by his simple and humble answer. What?

QUESTION 5

In previous times , the Jewish authorities plainly accused Jesus of doing some of His works by a disreputable authority. What were the works, and who was the authority they cited? 


QUESTION 6

"Else what shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why are they then baptized for the dead?" (1 Cor 15:29)


What is "baptism for the dead"? Does the church do this? If not, what was the purpose of St. Paul mentioning it? 


QUESTION 7

What heretical, large religious group practices "baptism for the dead"? 

QUESTION 8

I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily. (1 Cor 15:31)


What does St Paul mean by "I die daily"?

QUESTION 9

"let us eat and drink; for to morrow we die." <REF(1 Cor 15:32, partial)


From whence does St Paul take this expression?

QUESTION 10

"Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die." (vs. 1 Cor 15:36)


What is another saying similar to this, and by whom is it spoken? 


