Questions about Jesus' appearances after the resurrection.
Answers

ANSWER 1

The appearances of Jesus after His resurrection are recounted in a series of 11 gospels which are read serially in the Sunday matins service.  Each one of these readings also has a matching set of 2 hymns which are sung at the end of matins after the Sunday Exapostilarion (Holy is the Lord our God...) and the last sticheron of the praises (after the refrain "Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit").  These hymns are called the Expostilarion of the resurrection with its matching Theotokian and the Doxasticon of the Resurrection.
The Exapostilarion and Doxastikon summarize and emphasize certain aspects of the Gospel selection, in a leisurely and poetic way.


ANSWER 2

The Holy Scriptures record 4 times when Jesus appeared to all or most of the apostles.


The first appearance was to all the "eleven" save Thomas on the day of Christ's resurrection, when He entered their room at night, even though the doors where locked.  The second was to all the apostles, with Thomas, eight days later.
St John reports these first two appearances (in the ninth matins resurrection Gospel, John 20:19-31): 



Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you.  {20} And when he had so said, he showed unto them his hands and his side.  Then were the disciples glad, when they saw the Lord.  (John 20:19-20)

...
But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.  {25} The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord.  But he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.  {26} And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you.(John 20:24-26)


The 3rd reported appearance was when he beckoned to 7 of them from the shore, and told them to let down their nets, and they caught a great multitude of fish.
This is reported in the 10th Matins Resurrection Gospel, John 21:1-14)



After these things Jesus showed himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias; and on this wise showed he himself.  {2} There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathaniel of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two other of his disciples.  {3} Simon Peter saith unto them, I go a fishing.  They say unto him, We also go with thee.  They went forth, and entered into a ship immediately; and that night they caught nothing.  {4} But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the shore: but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus.  {5} Then Jesus saith unto them, Children, have ye any meat?  They answered him, No.  {6} And he said unto them, Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find.  They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes.  (John 21:1-6)



The last recorded appearance is by St Matthew at the very end of his gospel
(Matt 28:16-20, the 1st matins resurrection Gospel).  St Matthew only gives a quick summary of events after the resurrection, mentioning only one appearance of Jesus to the apostles, which must have been after the previous three: 



Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus had appointed them.  {17} And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted.  {18} And Jesus came and spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.  {19} Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: {20} Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the world.  Amen. (Mat 28:16-20)


ANSWER 3

On the day of the Resurrection, Jesus appeared to (in order) Mary Magdalene, two disciples who were in the country, to Peter alone, and to the eleven in the upper room (save Thomas).  St Luke's account shows this order.
See the 5th Matins Gospel, Luke 24:12-35,and the 6th, Luke 24:36-53)
Blessed Theophylact explains the texts especially well.  


Therefore, among the disciples and apostles, Christ appeared first to the 2 disciples out in the country (see another question), and among the apostles, Peter was the first to see the risen Lord.


The first apostle to believe in the resurrection was St John, who believed after seeing the empty tomb in the early morning, according to his own account:


The first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early, when it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken away from the sepulchre.  {2} Then she runneth, and cometh to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple, whom Jesus loved, and saith unto them, They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid him.  {3} Peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to the sepulchre.  {4} So they ran both together: and the other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the sepulchre.  {5} And he stooping down, and looking in, saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in.  {6} Then cometh Simon Peter following him, and went into the sepulchre, and seeth the linen clothes lie, {7} And the napkin, that was about his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by itself.  {8} Then went in also that other disciple, which came first to the sepulchre, and he saw, and believed.  {9} For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.


John 20:1-9, the 7th matins Gospel of the Resurrection)



"'Twas the Belovčd Disciple John, whose heart was pure and undimmed by timidity, who before all others descried the light of the risen Christ through spiritual eyes; and with his bodily Eyes did he behold the manifested Lord."  
Saint John of Shanghai and San Francisco, Paschal Epistle, 1956, Paris (see http://www.rocor.org.letters)


Note that the "one whom Jesus loved" is a code that St John uses for himself.  We know this from Holy Tradition, as the scripture is not absolutely explicit about the identity of this man (since St. John is the only evangelist to use this expression, we cannot reasonably expect him to explain it!)  It is interesting to note that even among those who substantially reject Holy Tradition and subscribe to the unscriptural notion that the entire revelation from God is ONLY in the scriptures believe that this man was John.  Such rejecters believe in and are dependant on more Holy Tradition than they are aware of, including more than just incidental information like this, such as the very councils that established the canon of scripture, and carefully defined doctrines of the two natures and wills of Christ, and many other things.  May God lead them to the fullness of true belief.


ANSWER 4

Mary Magdalene is cited by St Mark as being the first to see the risen Christ:


Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven devils.
(Mark 16:9), part of the 3rd matins resurrection Gospel, Mark 16:9-20)


This scripture would seem to decide the matter, but the holy tradition of the church, which is able to discern things spiritually, speaks otherwise.  The very fact that from Pascha till the eve of the Ascension the church chants the beautiful hymn: 


"The angel cried unto her who is full of grace,
[saying] 'Rejoice, rejoice O Pure Virgin;
again I say, rejoice!
For thy Son is risen from the grave on the third day.'"
(St.  John of Damascus)


serves to indicate that there is a hidden story in the scriptures concerning the Mother of God and her risen Son.  St Gregory Palamas eloquently explains this hidden treasure of knowledge, in a sermon about the Holy Myrrh-bearers.  Only a small part of that sermon is shown below, so that you will see this wonderful truth.  



...After the resurrection, the first person who saw Him was a woman, as we heard in Mark's gospel reading: "Now when Jesus was risen in the morning of the first day of the week, He appeared first to Mary Magdalene."  (Mk 16:9)


Clearly, it would appear therefore that the Evangelist stated both the time of Christ's resurrection, that is, the morning, and that He appeared first to Mary Magdalene and at precisely the time of His arising.  But that is not what it really says, as will be evident when we study the matter a little more closely, because the Evangelist previously said, in agreement with the other Evangelists, that this woman named Mary came to the tomb earlier, "very early in the morning" (v 16:2), with the other myrrhbearing women.  And when they found the tomb empty they departed.

...
Now, there is something mentioned by the Evangelists in a very shadowy way and I will reveal it to you.  Indeed the good news of the Lord's resurrection, as is proper and fitting, was received from Him first by the Theotokos, prior to all other men.  Also prior to all others, she saw Him and delighted in His divine speaking.  And she not only saw Him with her own eyes and heard Him with her own ears, but she alone first touched His sacred feet with her own hands.


However, the Evangelists do not say these things openly, because they did not wish to present the testimony of His Mother so they would not be giving unbelievers an excuse for suspicion.  But now, through the grace of Him who is risen, we can explain it to the faithful.

...
I surmise and gather from all the Evangelists, therefore, that the Theotokos was the first person to come to the tomb of the Son of God, accompanied by Mary Magdalene.  I conclude this mainly from the Evangelist Matthew, because he says,  "...Mary Magdalene came and the other Mary" (Matt 28:1),  Who was most certainly the Mother of God, to see the tomb.  "And behold there was a great earthquake, for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven and rolled back the stone from the entrance, and sat upon it.  His countenance was like lightening, and his rainment white as snow.  And for fear of him, the keepers trembled and became as dead."  (v.2-8)


 All the other women, therefore, came after the earthquake and after the guards fled, and found the tomb open and the stone moved away.  But the Mother of God arrived at the moment the earthquake was happening, the stone was being moved and the tomb was opened.  The guards, although very shaken, were still present, and after the quake they rose up seeking to flee.  But the Mother of God rejoiced beholding this scene.  It seems to me that the life-bearing tomb was opened first of all for her, because through her all things were opened to us, all that is above in heaven and below on earth; and for her the angel so shone that, despite the darkness of the hour, she was able to see by the fullness of the angel's light not only the empty tomb but also the grave clothes neatly put aside and testifying to the resurrection of Him Who had been entombed.


Obviously, the evangelizing angel was Gabriel himself, because the moment he saw her rushing to the tomb, he, who in the beginning had said to her, "Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found favor with God" (Lk.1:30), hastens now and descends to tell the Ever-virgin the same thing again and to announce the resurrection  from the dead of Him Who without seed was born from her, and to  lift the stone and display the empty tomb and the grave clothes  in order to confirm the good news.


ANSWER 5

Luke and Cleophas walked with the risen Christ as they made their way from Jerusalem to Emmaus.  These 2 disciples had heard reports of the resurrection from the women, but were unable to believe.  As they walked, Christ joined them, and expounded many things from the scriptures to them. At the end of their journey, as they ate, Jesus broke bread and blessed it, and it was only at this point that they recognized Him, and He vanished from their sight.  Even though they had traveled the whole day and it was late, they immediately hurried back to Jerusalem, travelling late into the night, and joining the eleven who had also seen the risen Christ, while they were coming back to Jerusalem.


This moving story is the 5th matins resurrection gospel. (Luke 24:13-35)
It is read on Bright Tuesday matins, as well as taking its place in the rotation of the 11 Gospels read during Sunday matins.  This Gospel is therefore read on the 5th, 16th, and 27th Sundays after Pentecost. The total number of readings in most years is 4. 


ANSWER 6

Angels were heavily involved in making the news of the resurrection manifest, both by announcing it, and by rolling away the stone of the tomb. We first encounter God's messengers in the very early morning: 


In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the sepulchre. {2} And, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it. {3} His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow: {4} And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men. {5} And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. {6} He is not here: for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay.(Mat 28:1-6)


Note that in this case, the two women were not bringing myrrh to anoint the Lord, but were only going to investigate the tomb. The "other Mary" is understood to be the Mother of God. After the announcement by the angel, Mary Magdalene went away, but the Theotokos stood by, and it was at this time that the angel gave to her a second "annunciation", that her Son was risen, and then Christ appeared to her. Mary Magdalene was filled with joy and fear, but did not completely believe in the resurrection yet. Because of her ignorance, and with great love, she later hastened to the tomb to anoint the Lord Jesus, and the recording of this incident reveals the agency of two angels: 


(Luke 24:1-11)  Now upon the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they came unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared, and certain others with them. {2} And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulchre. {3} And they entered in, and found not the body of the Lord Jesus. {4} And it came to pass, as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two men stood by them in shining garments: {5} And as they were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth, they said unto them, Why seek ye the living among the dead? {6} He is not here, but is risen: remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee, {7} Saying, The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again. {8} And they remembered his words, {9} And returned from the sepulchre, and told all these things unto the eleven, and to all the rest. {10} It was Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and other women that were with them, which told these things unto the apostles. {11} And their words seemed to them as idle tales, and they believed them not. (Luke 24:1-7)


In this incident we see that the stone had already been rolled away from the tomb, and two angels announced to the small cadre of women the good news of the resurrection. 


ANSWER 7

The Apostle Paul testified that he saw the risen Lord:



For I delivered unto you first of all that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; {4} And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures: {5} And that he was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve: {6} After that, he was seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep.  {7} After that, he was seen of James; then of all the apostles.  {8} And last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.  (1 Cor 15:3-8)


The Apostle refers to Christ's appearance in this way because it was several years after the resurrection.  He was formerly called Saul, and was a great persecutor of Christians.  He met Christ on the road, as he was hurrying toward another murderous errand: 



And Saul, yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went unto the high priest, {2} And desired of him letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any of this way, whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem.  {3} And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus: and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven: {4} And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?  {5} And he said, Who art thou, Lord?  And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.(Acts 9:1-5)


ANSWER 8

On the first day of the week, that is Sunday, in the evening, Christ appeared to the 11 while they were gathered in a room, even though the doors were shut. Both St Luke and St John report this appearance, each emphasizing different things. 



Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you. (John 20:19)

The God-man Jesus Christ, Who easily left the tomb without disturbing the stone that closed it was not hindered by a closed and locked door. Our Lord's body after the resurrection teaches us something about the destiny of our bodies. Blessed Theophylact tells us that "this is how we must understand the body of the Lord after the resurrection: it is spiritual, refined, a stranger to all coarseness." (Blessed Theophylact, Commentary on St Luke) Our bodies will share in these attributes. 


It is not without import that our Lord's first words were to give a blessing of "Peace". Only in the risen Lord may we obtain peace. 


St John goes on the mention more of what the Lord said and did, which included the important ability of His priests to remit sins: 



Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you. {22} And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: {23} Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. (John 20:21-23)



ANSWER 9

Some time during our Lord's forty days on earth after the resurrection, he appeared to seven of the disciples, who were fishing. This was an event similar to the time He called some of them to be his disciples, but with important differences, made possible by the passage of His three years of careful ministry to them.  the first time the Lord told the apostles to "let down their nets" is chronicles in Luke 5:1-13. More than three years later, the risen Lord gives the same instruction, as St. John records (John 1:25, comprising the 10th and 11th matins resurrection gospels). 

In the first case, our Lord only tells them to let down their nets, but to the tested apostles he tells them to let them down on the right side, and they obediently do so, as before, and are rewarded with a staggering catch of fish, which St John carefully mentions as one hundred fifty three. He marvels that there were so many, and yet the net was not broken. When the apostles were as yet uninitiated, and unlearned in spiritual things, the catch of fish broke their nets, and even when they had brought another ship to help with catch of fish, their boats began to sink.  After their education and proving, their nets hold this great catch of fish, and one boat is able to contain it, without sinking. These fishers of fish were truly made worthy and able to be great fishers of men, and their net, that is the Gospel and the Christian way of life, would never break again, but will hold all those who come to the church. 


In the previous instance, Peter was filled with fear, even asking the Lord to depart from him, as the as yet uninitiated apostle felt the full weight of his sins in the presence of the God-man.  In this latter case, the exuberant Peter cannot wait to be beside his Lord, and throws on his fishers cloak, and casts himself into the sea.  He who formerly had fear because of his sins now has confidence, because He knows the Lord. 


The first great catch of fish was too much for one ship, so another ship was pressed into service, although even it proved inadequate to contain the catch of fish.  In this second ship is shown in a mystery of the organization of the church, with it's bishops who are equal brothers, and rightly divide the word of truth. In the latter case, only one ship, with the seven Apostles, was able to fulfill the word of the Lord, and land all the fish.  Here we see in an even more powerful way the church, and the infinite resources those within it have to fulfill the commandments, and contain all the fish, that is, souls, who are caught in the nets of the gospel. 


After the other disciples landed their boats, and Peter pulled the  net full of great fishes to land in obedience to the Lord's command (for all that is done in the church is in obedience to Christ), the Lord invited them to "Come and dine". 
All the apostles knew it was the Lord, and were filled with unspeakable joy. 

 
After the meal, Jesus asked Peter three times if he loved Him, and restored his faith fully. There is a deep mystery in this, which we will only understand if we live the Christian life, and experience forgiveness and knowledge, as did Peter. 


ANSWER 10

Didn't you just hate it when a particularly impossible math problem was left "as an exercise to the reader" in your math textbook?  Hopefully you will not mind it so much now. The answer to this question is left to, as was usually said in those snotty textbooks, as an exercise to the attentive reader.  Hopefully you will do better on this question than I did on those math questions. 


A few hints since I am not a math professor: 

Eleven disciples are afraid, then made glad.
One works then takes a rest.
Two women.
Two young men.
One disciple's faith is restored. 
The young one is faster than the old one.
She now has more things to treasure in her heart.
Their hearts burned within them.
Gabriel is asked to repeat an important labor.
One makes a mistake, then her weeping in turned into joy.
No, this is not in order! 



