Orthodox Christian Questions about the Gospel of Matthew Chapter 1

QUESTION 1

Who is Matthew writing to primarily, Jews, Gentiles, Romans, etc? 


QUESTION 2

[Mat 1:1]  The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David,  the son of Abraham.

What does "Jesus" mean? 


QUESTION 3

[Mat 1:1]  The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David,  the son of Abraham.

What does "Christ" mean? 


QUESTION 4

[Mat 1:1] The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David,  the son of Abraham.

How does the name "Jesus Christ" mystically teach Jesus' two natures?


QUESTION 5

Discuss what the act of anointing was for a Jew, and what anointing was used for. 


QUESTION 6

How does the Jewish understanding of anointing differ markedly from the new, Christian reality? 


QUESTION 7

[Mat 1:1]  The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David,  the son of Abraham.

Why does Matthew takes pains to mention David, and why does he mention him first, even though Abraham preceded David? 


QUESTION 8
 
[Mat 1:1] The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David,  the son of Abraham.

Why does St Matthew mention David and Abraham at the very beginning? 


QUESTION 9
 
[Mat 1:1]  The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David,  the son of Abraham.

Is the appellation "Son of David" used in other places in Scripture? Which (it is not so important to cite Chapter and verse)?


QUESTION 10

Mat 1:2 Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat   Judas and his brethren;

Why is the genealogy begun with Abraham, even though there were certainly many ancestors before Abraham? 


QUESTION 11

[Mat 1:2] Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat   Judas and his brethren;

Who were Abraham's two sons, and their mothers. Why was Isaac mentioned and not the other?


QUESTION 12

[Mat 1:2] Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat   Judas and his brethren;

What does Isaac mean, and why was this name given


QUESTION 13

[Mat 1:3] And Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram;

Tell how Pharez and Zarah were conceived. Who was Thamar?


QUESTION 14

Mat 1:3 And Judas begat Phares and Zara of Thamar; and Phares begat Esrom; and Esrom begat Aram;

Describe the birth of Pharez and Zarah and its mystical meaning


QUESTION 15

Mat 1:5 And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab; and Booz begat Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse;

Who was Rachab?


QUESTION 16

Mat 1:5 And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab; and Booz begat Obed of Ruth; and Obed begat Jesse;

Who was Ruth, and what does her inclusion in the genealogy mystically forefigure?


QUESTION 17

[Mat 1:6] And Jesse begat David the king; and David the king begat Solomon of her that had been the wife of Urias;

Describe the story concerning David and  'Uriah's wife'. What very famous psalm was written as a result of David's repentance?


QUESTION 18

[Mat 1:11] And Josias begat Jechonias and his brethren, about the time they were carried away to Babylon:

What famous Saints were active during the Jews captivity in Babylon?

Babylon often has a symbolic meaning in the Scriptures. What does it stand for?


QUESTION 19

[Mat 1:16] And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.

Why did Matthew give the genealogy of Christ through Joseph, even though, as all know, since Jesus was conceived by the Holy Spirit, Joseph was not Jesus' true father?


QUESTION 20

[Mat 1:17] So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; and from David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations; and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations.

What is the mystical meaning of Matthew's division into 3 sets of 14 generations? What little bit of "funny business" is present in St Matthew's numeric reckoning? 


QUESTION 21

[Mat 1:18] Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost.

Why was Mary betrothed to Joseph? Why was Joseph chosen?


QUESTION 22

[Mat 1:18] Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost.

Why was Jesus conceived by the Holy Spirit, and not by normal sexual relations?


QUESTION 23

[Mat 1:19]  Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a public example, was minded to put her away privily.

What could Joseph have done instead?


QUESTION 24

[Mat 1:22] Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, 1:23 Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us.

What prophet?


QUESTION 25

[Mat 1:22] Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, 23 Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us.

What famous and stirring hymn is sung in Compline regarding 'Emmanuel'?


QUESTION 26

[Mat 1:25] And knew her not till she had brought forth her firstborn son: and he called his name JESUS.

Elucidate  this verse, in particular, refuting the false view that Joseph and Mary had other children. Why is such an idea ludicrous?


QUESTION 27
 
Without looking at any of the other questions or answers, please list the verses in St Matthew which show the fulfillment of important OT prophesies about the Messiah. Extra Credit if you can also quote  or paraphrase the prophesy, or give the author. 


