Questions about John 17: The High Priestly Prayer

QUESTION 1

"These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee..." John 17:1



When did Jesus say this prayer?
What is Jesus teaching, by His *example* of praying to the Father? Take into account the circumstances of the prayer. 



QUESTION 2

"Father, the hour is come; glorify Thy Son, that Thy Son also may glorify Thee" John 17:1, partial



What is the "hour" that has come? 
What is the "glory" Christ is talking about?



QUESTION 3

"As thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him." John 17:2


This is an oblique reference to what future revelation to which people?  

QUESTION 4

What definition for eternal life does Jesus give in His High Priestly prayer? Explain. 


QUESTION 5

"And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was." John 17:5


Our Lord is expressing in His words to the Father a dogma that later was officially and majestically proclaimed in the Symbol of Faith. What is it, and what are the words of the symbol of faith that apply?

QUESTION 6

"And now, O Father, glorify thou me with Thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was." John 17:5


There is more to say about these magnificent words.  Most heresies, up until the present day (today the character of heresy has changed, in an especially pernicious way), have directly touched upon the nature of God, the Holy Trinity, and especially the God-man, Jesus Christ.  These words of Christ directly refute which ancient heresy?  Explain. 

QUESTION 7

"For I have given unto them the words which thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me.  {9} I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine. {10} And all mine are thine, and thine are mine; and I am glorified in them. {11} And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are." John 17:8-11



Who is Christ directly referring to?
Who else?



QUESTION 8

"And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come to thee.  Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one, as we are." John 17:11


These words define an essential element of abiding in the truth, in the church, which ecumenism denies.  What is it?

QUESTION 9

"While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition; that the scripture might be fulfilled. (John 17:12)


Who is the "son of perdition"?

QUESTION 10

At which service(s) is this selection read?  Speculate why.

