Questions about the healing of the ten lepers

QUESTION 1

And as he entered into a certain village, there met him ten men that were lepers, which stood afar off: (17.12)


What is a leper? Why did they stand "afar off"?

QUESTION 2

Leprosy represented uncleanness to the Jews, but it has a much deeper spiritual meaning for us. What is it? 

QUESTION 3

"And they lifted up their voices, and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us." 17.13

This cry is reminiscent of which prayer that is so firm a part of Christian spirituality?
Name two out of three other incidents where Jesus was addressed by a similar but not identical prayer. 
Why is the prayer of the 10 lepers more forceful and dogmatically correct?



QUESTION 4

And when he saw them, he said unto them, Go shew yourselves unto the priests. And it came to pass, that, as they went, they were cleansed. 17.14)


What is odd about Jesus' command? Why did he order the lepers to go to the priests?


QUESTION 5

And when he saw them, he said unto them, Go shew yourselves unto the priests. And it came to pass, that, as they went, they were cleansed. 17.14)


What lesson might we glean from the timing of Jesus' command and the leper's healing?


QUESTION 6

" And when he saw them, he said unto them, Go show yourselves unto the priests. And it came to pass, that, as they went, they were cleansed. {15} And one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, and with a loud voice glorified God, {16} And fell down on his face at his feet, giving him thanks: and he was a Samaritan." (Luke 17:14-16)


What does the action of the Samaritan (and Jesus' response) teach us? 

QUESTION 7

Why did Jesus call the Samaritan a "stranger"? 


QUESTION 8

There is a deeper meaning behind the unwillingness to thank Jesus of the nine Jewish lepers and the thanksgiving given by the Samaritan? What is it? 


QUESTION 9

The healing of 9 Jews and a Samaritan together also has another spiritual meaning, regarding the nature and purpose of the incarnation. Which? 

QUESTION 10

Describe another healing of leprosy which followed an incomprehensible command by the Holy prophet Elisha. 

