Questions about Luke 5:1-11 - The great draught of fish 

QUESTION 1

"And it came to pass, that, as the people pressed upon him to hear the word of God, he stood by the lake of Gennesaret, {2} And saw two ships standing by the lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were washing their nets.  {3} And he entered into one of the ships, which was Simon's, and prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land. And he sat down, and taught the people out of the ship" (Luke 5:1-3)

How many of the Apostles were fishermen?
Name them.
Why did Christ teach them from the boat?  There is a practical and spiritual reason.
Give the time frame for this incident (early, towards the middle or late in Jesus' ministry?)



QUESTION 2

What is another name for the lake of Gennesaret?

QUESTION 3

"And he entered into one of the ships, which was Simon's, and prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land." (Luke 5:3)


There is a practical and significant spiritual meaning in the Lord's instruction.  Both are is related to the amount he told them to go offshore, and His later instructions.  Explain.

QUESTION 4

"Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught." (Luke 5:4)


What does the net represent?  What is the "deep" (again, there is a literal and spiritual meaning)?


QUESTION 5

"And Simon answering said unto him, Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net." (Luke 5:5)


What does Peter's statement and his person represent spiritually? What does it show about the character of Peter?

QUESTION 6

We cannot leave these magnificent words of Peter without discussing what they teach us about the true nature of faith.  What may we learn about faith from Peter's reaction?

QUESTION 7

"And they beckoned to their partners, which were in the other ship, that they should come and help them. And they came, and filled both the ships, so that they began to sink." (Luke 5:7)


This is an image of what?


QUESTION 8

"When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus' knees, saying, Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord. {9} For he was astonished, and all that were with him, at the draught of the fishes which they had taken..." (Luke 5:8)

 
Contrast Peter's response to another time when the Lord told them to let down their nets and the caught many fish.  Why was it different?

QUESTION 9

Why did the nets brake?  There is a spiritual meaning. Why did they not break in a second fishing incident (where is this story told)?

QUESTION 10

It is well worth comparing and contrasting the two fishing incidents involving the apostles. We have mentioned the second incident, given in St john's gospel, which makes reference to the earlier incident, in St Luke which we are examining now. Let us contemplate both miracles, and see how they differ and how they are the same, and what the differences have to teach us. 


