Questions about the Parable of the Unmerciful Debtor 

QUESTION 1

The story of the "Unmerciful Debtor" is read on the 11th Sunday after Pentecost, and is found in Matthew 18:23-35.  What "type" of story is it?  Why did Jesus tell these kinds of stories?  

QUESTION 2

In this story a comparison is made - it is the entire reason for the story.  

What is this comparison?  
What was the immediate reason for the parable (hint: Look at the dialogue that preceded it.)
 Describe the compared thing in the light of the story.  

QUESTION 3

"Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king, which would take account of his servants.  {24} And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, which owed him ten thousand talents." Matthew 18:23,24


In order to understand the parable, we must understand all of the "characters" and the symbols.  

Who is the "certain king"?  
What is the "accounting" that is spoken of?  When does it occur?  
What does the debt of 10,000 talents represent?  There is a subtlety present in the actual number also.  Do you know what it is?  
The parable actually refers to two time frames, and two accountings.  Which? 


QUESTION 4

"But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made" Matthew 18.25 


The King does something that appears to be quite harsh to the spiritually undiscerning, but great mercy is hidden in His actions.  In order to understand this, we must discern what the wife and children represent.  What does the selling of them signify?  

QUESTION 5

"Then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt. {28} But the same servant went out, and found one of his fellowservants, which owed him an hundred pence: and he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owest.
" (Mat 18:27-28)


"Going out" has two meanings.  One is strictly practical, and other is a deep and terrible spiritual meaning.  What are the two meanings?  

QUESTION 6

"But the same servant went out, and found one of his fellowservants, which owed him an hundred pence: and he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owest." Matt 18.28


The difference in magnitude of 10,000 and 100 holds an important spiritual meaning.  What is it?

QUESTION 7

"So when his fellow servants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came and told unto their lord all that was done." (18.31 )


Who are the fellow servants?  When did they go to their king?  Keep in mind the time frames of the parable.  

QUESTION 8

"And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him." "18.34"


What is the meaning?  Who are the torturers?  How long is the servant punished?  How can he repay the debt?


QUESTION 9

What virtues does this parable teach, and conversely, which sins does it warn against?  

QUESTION 10

There are other stories which make the same comparison as the parable of the Unmerciful Debtor ("the kingdom of heaven is like...).  Cite at least 3.

