Questions about the Parable of the Wedding Feast 

QUESTION 1

The Parable of the Great supper appears in Matthew 22:1-14 and is read on the 14th Sunday after Pentecost. 

Summarize the parable in a few words.
What was the immediate purpose for the telling of this parable? Consider to whom it was told, and it's proximity to other events and parables in the Gospel narrative. 
What other parable served the same immediate purpose? 
Which parable was more "condemning"? Why?



Note: A similar parable, in Luke 14:16-24 describes a different event and was told for a different purpose. 

QUESTION 2

This parable is filled with much symbolism, as in all parables.  Let us examine some of the symbols, and construct a "glossary", to help us glean the deeper meaning. 


"The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son ..." Matt 22:2

Who is the "King"? 
Who is the son? 
Who is the bride?
What is the "marriage" (what does it represent)?


QUESTION 3

"The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son, {3} And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding: and they would not come." Matt 22:2-3)

Who are these first servants? 
How did the servants accomplish their task? 
There are two "callings" mentioned, "to call them that were bidden."  What are these two callings? 



QUESTION 4

"Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: come unto the marriage.  {5} But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise: {6} And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them." Matt 22:4-6)



Who are the other servants?  (Don't try too hard to come up with something different on this one!)
Who are the remnant, that "took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them"
What is the meaning of the one who went "to his farm"?  This is an indication of a particular kind of sinful passion.
What is the meaning of the one who went "to his merchandise"? 



QUESTION 5

"But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city. {8} Then saith he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which were bidden were not worthy."   (Matt 22:7-8)


What does Jesus prophesy here? 


QUESTION 6

"Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the marriage.  {10} So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad and good: and the wedding was furnished with guests." Matt 22:9-10)

This is another prophesy?  Of what? 
What do the highways represent? 
It was said that there were "both bad and good" in the festal hall. 
	
	What is the meaning? 
	How, and when will the "good" be discerned from the "bad". 
	There is another parable which very dramatically illustrates this truth.  What is it? 
	


QUESTION 7

"And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment ..." (Matt 22:11)


In order to understand what subsequently transpires, we must know of the custom of the "wedding garment", in the culture to which Jesus was speaking.  Explain this custom, and it's spiritual application. 


QUESTION 8

"And he saith unto him, Friend, how camest thou in hither not having a wedding garment? And he was speechless." (Matt 22:12)

What does the King's interrogation represent? 
Why did the King require the servant to be wearing a wedding garment?
Why was the servant speechless?

QUESTION 9

"Then said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away, and cast him into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." (Matt 22:13)



Who are the servant the king orders?
Why was the servant bound hand and foot?  This represents and important fact, which will help us only in this life, if we learn it, and live like we know it
Tell what the gnashing of teeth represents.  



QUESTION 10

"For many are called, but few are chosen." (Matt 22:14)

 
A strange saying.  What does it mean? 

QUESTION 11

Compare and contrast the Parable of the Evil Husbandmen and the Parable of the Wedding Feast. 

