Questions about the Samaritan woman.   

QUESTION 1

Who was the Samaritan woman?  Tell something of her life after meeting Jesus.

QUESTION 2

Then cometh he to a city of Samaria, which is called Sychar, near to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.
 >(John 4:5)


Who were the Samaritans?  Describe their religion and relationship with the Jews.

QUESTION 3

There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water: Jesus saith unto her, Give me to drink.   (John 4:7)


What time did Jesus meet the Samaritan woman at the well?  Is there anything odd about this time?  Why do you think she drew water at time?

QUESTION 4

What 2 revolutionary things did Jesus do by even talking to the Samaritan woman?  The proud Pharisees would have judged Him on at least two accounts.

QUESTION 5

Water plays a big role in the story of the Samaritan woman.  Cite at least 5 other places where water is used to describe or point to our salvation. 

In this case, Christ said to her: "Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again: {14} But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life."    (John 4:13-14)


What is the meaning of "water" in this context? 


QUESTION 6

There was a significant prophesy concerning salvation which Jesus made when He spoke to the Samaritan woman.  What was it?  Approximate when it was understood by the entire church to be fulfilled (or being fulfilled)?

QUESTION 7

The conversation between Christ and the Samaritan woman mystically is actually another conversation between what 2 parties?

QUESTION 8

Tell the story of the Samaritan woman.  Don't look at the bible when you do it.  I won't either. Where is it found?


QUESTION 9

Compare and contrast the reaction of the Samaritan woman and townspeople and the townspeople in the region of the Gadarenes when Jesus visited them.

QUESTION 10

The Sunday of the Samaritan woman is more complicated liturgically because of the multiple commemorations this day.  Name them.  List how many stichera for each commemoration are sung at 'Lord I have cried', and explain why.

