The Symbol of Faith (Nicene Creed) of the Orthodox Church -  Part 2 - Article 1

QUESTION 1

I believe in one God ...

What is the meaning of "I believe"?  What does this affirmation convey? 


QUESTION 2

Why does the first article state "in one God", rather than "in God"? 


QUESTION 3

There is scripture that refer to "gods", such as: 

[Gen 3:5]  For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.

[Psa 82:6]  I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High.

[John 10:34-36]  Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods? {35} If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the scripture cannot be broken; {36} Say ye of him, whom the Father hath sanctified, and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?

and also: 

[Exo 12:12]  For I will pass through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am the LORD.

[Exo 15:11]  Who is like unto thee, O LORD, among the gods? who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?

Explain how these may be reconciled with "I believe in one God".


QUESTION 4


I believe in one God ...

Cite Bible quotations which state this dogma (of one unique God).


QUESTION 5

What is the term for belief in many Gods?


QUESTION 6

What is "pantheism"? 


QUESTION 7

List some common modern polytheistic or pantheistic religions. 


QUESTION 8

Describe some of the things people have worshipped as Gods.


QUESTION 9

List the three main monotheistic religions.


QUESTION 10

Name some people that the Jews of the OT encountered which were polytheistic
If you can. name the major "God's" of these people which the Jews encountered. 

QUESTION 11

Why do we know God exists?


QUESTION 12

I believe in one God, the Father Almighty....

What are the *moral* implications of our confession of God as Father?
There is much important scripture about this. 


QUESTION 13

Describe some attributes of God.


QUESTION 14

... maker of heaven and earth, and of all things visible and visible.

What is the invisible world?


QUESTION 15

What is an angel?


QUESTION 16

What are the *known* ranks of angels? Why do we know this? 


QUESTION 17

What does the word "Angel" mean? 


QUESTION 18

Name the seven archangels


QUESTION 19

From what did the Lord create the world?


QUESTION 20

Was God referred to as "Father" in the OT? 


QUESTION 21

How is God the Father made known to us? 


QUESTION 22

"I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth"

How should we understand the terms "heaven" and "earth"?

QUESTION 23

The Symbol of Faith confesses the Holy Trinity. What is the first scriptural reference which begins to reveal the Holy Trinity? 


QUESTION 24

There are usually three stars painted in icons of the Mother of God. What do they signify. 


QUESTION 25

What are the differences between the persons of the Holy Trinity? 


QUESTION 26

The  Mystery of the Holy Trinity is more fully revealed in the New Testament. Cite (or paraphrase) incidents from the Gospels. 


QUESTION 27

Do the Epistle writers reveal the Mystery of the Holy Trinity? 


QUESTION 28

Besides the First reference in Genesis, how does the OT speak of the Holy Trinity? 


QUESTION 29

What is the most important moral significance of faith in the Holy Trinity? 


QUESTION 30

Why do we call the first person of God "Father"? 


QUESTION 31

The Church believes that each Christian has a Guardian Angel who protest them, prays on their behalf to God, and helps impart to them spiritual knowledge. Is this belief scriptural? 


