The Symbol of Faith (Nicene Creed) of the Orthodox Church -  Part 3 - Article 2

QUESTION 1

What does the Symbol of Faith tell us regarding Jesus Christ? 


QUESTION 2

What does "Jesus Christ" mean? 


QUESTION 3

[Mat 1:1] The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David,  the son of Abraham.

How does the name "Jesus Christ" mystically teach Jesus' two natures?


QUESTION 4

Who for us men and for our salvation came down from the heavens, and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man; 

[Mat 1:18] Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy Ghost.

Why was Jesus conceived by the Holy Spirit, and not by normal sexual relations?


QUESTION 5

How does the name "Jesus Christ" mystically teach Jesus' two natures?


QUESTION 6

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, / the Only-begotten, Begotten of the Father before all ages,


QUESTION 7

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, / the Only-begotten, Begotten of the Father before all ages,

Explain the terms "Only-begotten", and "before all ages"


QUESTION 8

Light of Light, True God of True God

What do these words mean? What "type"of light is being referred to? 


QUESTION 9

Can human beings see this light? 


QUESTION 10

Begotten, not made; of one essence with the Father...

Why is the distinction made concerning "begotten" instead of "made". What major heresy does this phrase repudiate? 


QUESTION 11

Begotten, not made; of one essence with the Father, by whom all things were made....

If God the Father is called the "maker of Heaven and earth", why is Jesus Christ described as "by whom all things were made"? 


QUESTION 12

Who for us men and for our salvation came down from the heavens, / and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man; 

What does it mean, that Jesus Christ, Who is God, and therefore everywhere present, would "come down from the heavens"?


QUESTION 13

Who for us men and for our salvation came down from the heavens, / and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man; 

How do we know Jesus was incarnate of the Holy Spirit? Why was this necessary? 


QUESTION 14

Who for us men and for our salvation came down from the heavens, / and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man; 

In which ways is Jesus' humanity like or unlike mankind? 


QUESTION 15

Who for us men and for our salvation came down from the heavens, / and was incarnate of the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary, and became man; 

Why does the Symbol include the phrase "and became man", when the word "incarnate" also conveys this meaning? 

QUESTION 16

What do we believe concerning Mary's virginity? 


QUESTION 17

How many natures do you have? Jesus Christ? 


QUESTION 18

How many wills does Jesus Christ have. 


QUESTION 19

How do Jesus Christ's natures mix or intermingle? 


QUESTION 20

Are there example from the scripture of Jesus' human will and divine will interacting? 


QUESTION 21

What was the first prophesy in the Bible concering the coming of Jesus?


QUESTION 22

What are some prophesies fulfilled by the immediate events surrounding the birth of Christ up until his third year? 


QUESTION 23




