Explanation about scripture Orthodox Christians read on the Transfiguration

QUESTION 1

"And it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he took Peter and John and James, and went up into a mountain to pray." (LUKE 9:28)


What sayings? 

QUESTION 2

" And it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he took Peter and John and James, and went up into a mountain to pray." (Luke 9:28)


Why did Jesus take these three of His disciples?


QUESTION 3

"And it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he took Peter and John and James, and went up into a mountain to pray." (LUKE 9:28)


What were the practical considerations and spiritual meaning of Jesus ascending a mountain to pray?

QUESTION 4

" And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his raiment was white and glistering. " (Luke 9:29)


What made His raiment white and glistering? What occurrence in the OT proves it is possible for our "countenance to be altered"?

QUESTION 5

"And, behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and Elias: {31} Who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. " (Luke 9:20-31)


Moses and Elias conversation about events after their death proves and important truth about the dead, which a good part of those who profess to be Christians seem to not be aware of. What? 

QUESTION 6

"And, behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and Elias: {31} Who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. " (Luke 9:20-31)


Why did Moses and Elias appear? What does each represent? 

QUESTION 7

"And, behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and Elias: {31} Who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he should accomplish at Jerusalem. " (Luke 9:20-31)


Why did Moses and Elias speak of Jesus' upcoming passion? It would not be out of order to make an educated guess. 

QUESTION 8

How did Jesus' Transfiguration prepare the apostles for His subsequent crucifixion?


QUESTION 9

"But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep: " (vs. 32)


Why were they heavy with sleep? 

QUESTION 10

"And when the voice was past, Jesus was found alone. And they kept it close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they had seen. " (Luke 9:36)


Why did the Apostles tell nobody about this startling event? 

